But for Hegel, the Enlightenment had betrayed itself, left unfulﬁlled its religious mission, because of the nature of the image of man which it produced, which emphasises human autonomy and self-sufﬁciency. 

These views of the relationship between Enlightenment and religion have been enormously inﬂuential.

Nor was Hegel’s view of the religious thought of the Enlightenment without considerable substance, especially in the case of France. 

Religious movements such as Deism, especially strong in Britain and France, denied that man could gain any knowledge of the creator apart from the mere fact of ‘his’ existence. Writers such as Voltaire alternately crusaded against all organised religion, or argued that religious observance was only to be tolerated because of its utility in producing social stability, not because its claims were actually true. Materialists such as Julien de La Mettrie (1709–51) argued in his L’homme machine of 1747 that there was no such thing as a soul, and that all knowledge came ultimately from sense impressions of the surrounding physical world. Men, the Baron dHolbach argued in another notoriously materialist treatise, the Système de la nature (1771), should abandon religion completely, to reconcile themselves with ‘nature'. 

And again, economic thought in the Enlightenment in the works of such men as Adam Smith did deﬁne individuals as autonomous seekers of self-interest rather than of salvation.

However, our picture of the Enlightenment as ‘modern paganism’ starts to become considerably more complex once we abandon this focus on the small group of determinedly anti-religious thinkers who are almost conﬁned to the French Enlightenment.

As we have already seen, thinkers of the stature of Hegel saw the Enlightenment as a movement which could not be understood except within religious categories, however one assesses his claim that the Enlightenment had betrayed man ’s religious nature. 

In fact the Enlightenment produced a wide variety of responses to organised religion, ranging all the way from violent Voltairean hostility to religion, through to attempts to bolster orthodox belief by demonstrating its rationality and accordance with natural law.
